JEREMY: Hi.
Now, you have installed
the Haskell platform,
let's start using it.
I'm in a terminal window
here on my Mac OS laptop.
You could do something
similar on your Linux machine
or maybe a DOS
prompt in Windows.
And I'm going to
type in 'ghci', which
is the interpreter for the
Glasgow Haskell compiler.
Press Enter.
And look, it loads up.
I'm running version 7.10 here.
You might have a slightly
different version,
but hopefully, everything
should work out fine.
Notice that the prompt here,
the interactive prompt,
it says Prelude, which indicates
that the standard Haskell
library, Prelude,
has been loaded.
First of all, I'm going to type
in a string-- "hi everyone."
And this string value
is returned for me.
I can see the type
of 'hi everyone."
If I go to the start of the
line and say ':type' --
this is a GHCi command
here-- ':type'
"hi everyone" tells me that "hi
everyone" is of type character
list, which is equivalent
to String, as you know.
I can type in numbers, as well.
Here's 42.
Arithmetic expression--
here's 1 plus 1.
I can also use variables
like x equals 3.
And from now on, I can use x
or use x inside arithmetic.
Good.
I could also call
functions on strings.
So let's find out the
length of "hi everyone."
We can also reverse
"hi everyone,"
which shows that that "enoyreve
ih" is "hi everyone" written
backwards.
These standard functions,
length and reverse,
are defined for us in
the Haskell Prelude.
Now, we're going to
define a function.
Just inside the GHCi
interactive prompt
we can define the
factorial function.
Let fact n equal--
remember this is
the product of the first
n positive numbers.
If n==0, then fact
of 0 is 1 else.
We want to compute n
times fact n minus 1.
So if I say fact of 0,
that should give us back 1.
That's the then case.
If I say fact of
3, that gives us
3 times 2 times 1, which is 6.
Fact of 5 is 120 and so on.
So you see that we can
define functions using let
and then give the single
line function definition here
inside GHCi.
It might be the case
that we actually
want to define a function in
a Haskell source code file.
So let's do that now.
I'm going to start up
the gedit text editor,
and I'm going to
create a new file.
I'm going to save this
file in the folder I'm in,
which is-- let's
find it quickly.
I'm in the right folder now.
And I'm going to call this file
factorial.hs Haskell source
code.
So simple factorial
definition-- so I
can say fact2-- let's
give this a different name
to the previous one-- takes an
integer and returns an integer.
That's the signature
for the function.
Fact2 n equals-- and I can use
the same definition of n==0
then 1 else n times
fact2 of n minus 1.
Great.
So let's save this file-- save.
And then, we'll go back to GHCi.
There we go-- GHCi,
:load factorial.hs.
And it loads.
So you can use
relative pathnames--
relative to the directory
that GHCi is running in--
or you can use an absolute
pathname, as well, if you
have the full name of
the directory where
the file is stored.
I've loaded the
factorial file now.
And it's loaded OK
without any problems.
So now, I can say
fact2 of 10, while it
calculates the factorial.
I can work up the
type for fact2.
It takes an integer argument and
returns integer results.
Notice the ':t' is
shorthand for the type command.
There we go-- same again.
And I could map
fact2 over 1 to 10.
And there we go.
Now, let's go and
have another look
at the definition of fact2.
We could actually
rewrite this definition
to make it a little bit neater.
Let's try and save this and then
:reload fact2-- load factorial--
it's loaded again.
And now, we can rerun
the same command
and get the same results.
And perhaps, the function
looks a bit more elegant now.
What happens if I
say fact2 of minus 1?
Oh, sorry.
I need to put minus
1 inside brackets.
Otherwise, it's
trying to subtract 1
from the fact2 function.
Let's try this again.
It starts running, and
It runs and carries
on running for a long time.
This doesn't match the first
case because the input isn't 0.
So it matches the
second case, which
multiplies the number by
one less than the number.
So we get minus 1 times minus
2 times minus 3 times minus 4,
ad infinitum.
We may get a stack
overflow eventually,
but I can't afford
to wait that long.
So I'm going to press
Control-C and then Enter.
And hopefully, this should
stop the computation.
To quit GHCi, I
type in ':quit',
and I drop back into
my command prompt.
Let's start again.
I could also quit by typing
Control-D. That gets me out,
as well.
Let's do some IO--
putStrLn "hello."
It might be the case
that I want to read
in some input from the
keyboard and then print out
to the output.
So I'm going to say, do.
And x is getLine.
Look, I get error
message here, which
says "The last statement in 'do'
block must be an expression."
What I wanted to do
there was write myself
a multi-line do statement.
But actually, I wasn't
able to do that.
I need to say, set
+m, in the GHCi environment
to allow multi-line statements.
Now, I can say, do x is getLine,
line up the do commands.
And now, I'm going to
say, putStrLn "hello,"
concatenated with x.
Right.
I pressed Enter twice, and that
got me out of the do construct.
And now, GHCi is
waiting for my input.
So I'm just going
to type in my name,
Jeremy, Enter, and back
comes "hello Jeremy."
So the do has been evaluated.
Let's write ourselves
one more function.
I'm going to go back to get it.
And I'm going to write
myself a new function, which
I'm going to call nobles.hs.
Make people noble--
so mknoble is
going to take a string parameter
and return a string result.
And I'm going to say mknoble.
If I receive a
name, then I'm going
to return "Sir" plus that name
++ for concatenation.
OK, let's save this.
And now, we should
be able to load it
into GHCi-- load nobles.
And now, I can say, mknoble
"Alex Ferguson," and "Sir Alex
Ferguson" returns.
That's great--
just go back here.
I wonder what happens if I want
to make a female person noble.
Well, I really need
another argument here,
Boolean, that allows
me to say, if-- well,
let's give this
parameter a name, female.
If female-- sorry-- then "Dame"
else "Sir" ++ name.
That's all on one line.
It just looks a bit messy.
Perhaps I should move this along
a bit so it's on the next line.
I need to indent it more
than the if statement.
OK, so now, I'm going
to save that file
and go and load it again.
Colon l is short for
load-- nobles.hs.
Now, I can mknoble.
If I try and mknoble
"Alex Ferguson,"
it's going to complain
because I haven't said
whether he's male or female.
So look, it says now,
"Couldn't match expected type
of 'Bool' with the actual
type 'Char'" because the first
parameter should be a Boolean
where I would have given it
a string.
So we need to say mknoble False
because "Alex Ferguson" is not
a female.
And now, it says,
"Sir Alex Ferguson."
And then, I say mknoble
True "Helen Mirren."
That becomes "Dame
Helen Mirren."
Great.
So that's a function
we defined here.
We can see the type of the
function, :type mknoble,
and now, it takes a
Bool, then a string,
and then returns a string.
Great.
Let's quit.
And I hope you have
fun playing with GHCi.
And again, if you have
any problems or questions,
let us know in the
comments section below.
Thanks.